Welcome to the final lesson
for this week.
In the previous lesson,
we learned how to perform
semantic segmentation
using convolutional
neural networks.
In this video, we will
learn how to use the output
of these networks for scene
understanding of road scenes.
Specifically, you will
learn how to use the output
of semantic segmentation models
to estimate the drivable space
and lane boundaries.
Let's quickly review
what we expect
as an output from
a semantic segmentation model.
A semantic segmentation model
takes an image as an input,
and provides us output,
a category classification
for every pixel.
Now let's use
this output to perform
some useful tasks for
self-driving cars.
The first task we will be
discussing is the estimation
of a drivable surface
from semantic segmentation
output in 3D.
Drivable space is
defined as the region
in front of the vehicle
where it is safe to drive.
In the context of
semantic segmentation,
the drivable surface includes
all pixels from the road,
crosswalks, lane markings,
parking spots,
and even sometimes rail tracks.
Estimating a drivable surface
is very important as it
is one of the main steps
for constructing occupancy grids
from 3D depth sensors.
You will learn more about
occupancy grids in course 4,
where they will be used to
represent where obstacles are
located in the environment
during collision avoidance.
But for now, let's
describe how to perform
drivable surface estimation from
the semantic segmentation output.
First, we use
a ConvNet to generate
the semantic segmentation output
of an image frame,
we then generate 3D coordinates
of some of the pixels
in this frame,
either from stereo data or by
projecting a lighter point cloud
to the image plane.
With a known extrinsic
calibration between sensors,
we can project lidar points into
the image plane and match them
to the corresponding pixels.
We then proceed to
choose 3D points
that belong to the
drivable surface category.
As we mentioned earlier,
this category should at
least include the road,
lane markings, and
pedestrian crossings.
In certain scenarios,
other classes such as
railroad tracks for example
might also be included,
depending on the driving context.
All other classes
are excluded even
if their height is similar
to the drivable surface.
Finally, we use this subset of
3D points to estimate
a drivable surface model.
The complexity of
this model can range from
a simple plane to more complex
spline surface models.
Let's describe how
to robustly fits
a planar drivable
surface model given
segmented image data
and lidar points.
We first define the model
of a plane as ax
plus by plus z equals
d, where x, y,
z is any point on the plane,
the coefficients a, b,
and 1 define the plane
normal vector,
and d is a constant offset.
We can form a set of
linear equations to estimate
the parameters of this plane
model using as measurements,
each of the points identified
as belonging to
the drivable surface.
The parameters of the model are
now summarized by the vector p,
and the measurements
are separated
into the matrices A and B.
As formulated in course 2,
we can find a solution
for this system of
linear equations using
the method of least squares.
As a result, our plane
parameter vector p is
equal to the pseudoinverse
of A times B.
This model has
three free parameters
to be estimated, and as such,
we need at least
three non-colinear
3D points to fit the plane.
In practice, we will have
many more points
than are necessary,
so we can apply the method of
least squares once
again to identify
parameters that minimize
the mean square distance
of all points from the plane.
Of course, some points
will be labeled
incorrectly and may not
truly belong to
the drivable surface.
So how can we avoid
incorrect semantic labels
negatively affecting
the quality of
a drivable surface
plane estimation?
Fortunately for us, we learned
a very powerful and
robust estimation method
in week 2 of this course.
Specifically, we can use
the RANSAC algorithm
to robustly fit
a drivable surface
plane model even
with some errors in our
semantic segmentation output.
Let's go through
the RANSAC algorithm for
the drivable surface
estimation as a refresher.
First, we randomly select
the minimum number of data points
required to fit our model.
In this case, we randomly
choose three points in 3D.
Second, we use these three points
to compute the model
parameters a, b,
and d, and use the method of
least squares to solve
for our plane parameters.
We then proceed to
determine the number of
3D points that satisfy
these model parameters.
Usually for drivable
surface estimation,
most of the outliers
are a result of
the erroneous
segmentation outputs
located at the boundaries.
If the number of outliers is low,
we terminate and return
the computed plane parameters.
Otherwise, we sample
three new points
at random and repeat the process.
Then once the algorithm meets
its termination condition,
we calculate the final
planar surface model of
the road from all of
the inliers in
the largest inlier set.
The use of a planar
surface model works
well if the road
is actually flat,
a valid assumption in
many driving scenarios.
For more complex scenarios,
such as entering a steeply
climbing highway entrance
from a flat roadway for example,
more complex models are needed.
Although we estimate
the drivable surface,
we still have not
determined where
the car is allowed to
drive on this surface.
Usually, a vehicle should
stay within its lane,
determined by lane markings
or the road boundaries.
Lane estimation is the task
of estimating where
a self-driving car can drive
given a drivable surface.
Many methods exist in
the literature to
accomplish this task.
For example, some methods
directly estimate
lane markings from ConvNets
to determine where
the car can drive.
However, for higher-level
decision-making,
a self-driving car should also be
aware of what is at
the boundary of the lane.
Classes at the boundary
of the lame can
range from a curb, a road,
where opposite traffic resides
or dynamic in parked vehicles.
The self-driving car has
to base its maneuvers
on what objects occur at
the boundary of the lane,
especially during
emergency pull overs.
We will refer to the task of
estimating the lane and what
occurs at its boundaries as
semantic lane estimation.
Notice that if we
estimate the lane
using the output of
semantic segmentation,
we get boundary
classification for free.
Let's go through
a simple approach to
this problem to clarify
the lane estimation task.
Given the output of
a semantic segmentation model,
we first extract
a binary mask of the pixels
belonging to classes that
occur as lane separators.
Such classes can include curbs,
lane markings, or
rails for example.
Then we apply an edge detector
to the binary mask.
As you remember from
the first week of this course,
edge detectors can be as simple
as estimating gradients
from convolutions.
Here, we use
a famous edge detector,
the canny edge detector.
The output are
pixels classified as
edges that will be used to
estimate the lane boundaries.
The final step is to determine
which model is to be used
to estimate the lanes.
The choice of models defines
what the next step will be.
Here we choose
a linear lane model,
where each lane is assumed
to be made up of a single line.
To detect lines in
the output edge map,
we need aligned detector.
The Hough transform line
detection algorithm is widely
used and capable of
detecting multiple lines
in an edge map.
Given an edge map,
the Hough transform can
generate a set of lines that
link pixels belonging to
edges in the edge map.
The minimum length of
the required lines
can be set as
a hyperparameter to force
the algorithm to only detect
lines that are long enough
to be part of lane markings.
Further refinement can be applied
based on the scenario at hand.
For example, we know that
our lane should not be
a horizontal line
if our camera is
placed forward facing in
the direction of motion.
Furthermore, we can remove
any line that does not belong to
the drivable surface to get
a final set of
lane boundary primitives.
The last step would be
to determine the classes
that occur at
both sides of the lane,
which can easily be done
by considering the classes
on both sides of
the estimated lane lines.
We will not discuss
edge detectors
and Hough transforms in detail,
as these topics deserve
a separate discussion outside
the scope of this course.
However, powerful computer
vision libraries such as
Open CV, have open-source
implementations,
and tutorials on how to detect
lines using the Hough transform,
and how to detect edges using
the Canny edge detector.
If interested, take a look
at how these
algorithms are used in
practice using the links
provided in the
supplementary material.
In summary, semantic
segmentation can
be used to estimate
the drivable space,
to determine what occurs at
the boundary of
the drivable space,
and to estimate lanes on
the drivable surface.
The applications discussed so
far are very active
areas of research,
and what you've learned
during this lesson provides
a solid starting point and
competitive baselines
for the task of
semantic lane detection and
drivable surface estimation.
Furthermore,
semantic lane detection
and drivable surface
estimation are
the most prominent uses for
semantic segmentation models in
the context of self-driving cars.
However, semantic
segmentation has
many more useful applications.
Most importantly, aiding
the self-driving car
in performing
both 2D object detection
and localization.
With information about
which pixels to evaluate for
objects or weather features
are on static or moving objects,
the robustness of
the perception system
can be significantly improved.
It can act as a sanity check
or a filter to avoid
including incorrect information
in other perception tasks.
Semantic segmentation
is a powerful tool for
self-driving cars and a core
component of the high
level perception stack.
You will have the chance
to validate its usefulness
next week when we discuss
our final assignment.
See you then.